---
layout: lecture
topic: Communication Technologies and Justice
title: MC433 - week 1
week: 1
course: MC433
---

### Readings

#### [Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace](http://codev2.cc/) by Lawrence Lessig (chapters 1-3)

He believes in a sort of constitutional approach to regulating
the Internet---not necessarily a top-down one, but he thinks we need to find a
flexible way of governing things otherwise it will all devolve into either
anarchy or totalitarianism. So we need sort of government regulation, but we
also have to be careful about letting governments regulate _too_ much, because
they can't be trusted in their current context.

#### [A Theory of Justice](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/129237.A_Theory_of_Justice) by John Rawls (chapter 1)

He builds on the idea of the social contract (as in Locke, Rousseau, Kant) and
primarily focuses on the idea of justice as **fairness**, in contrast to
utilitarianism, which he criticises as teleological (that's one of my favourite
words, incidentally) and unable to "take seriously the distinction between
persons".

#### [Inclusion and Democracy](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/483477.Inclusion_and_Democracy) by Iris Marion Young (chapter 1)

She differentiates between two models of democracy. The **aggregative model**
(which treats democracy is a matter of aggregating self-interested preferences
in a fair and reliable way) is, partly problematic because it treats all
preferences as equal no matter their origin or level of rationality. The
**deliberative model**, on the other hand, is about communication and reason:
more weight is given to preferences that stand up to dialogic examination. She
also talks about structural inequality, and has a wonderfully pithy line on it:
"For democracy to promote justice it must already be just." My personal opinion
on this book so far is that it's pretty great (much more considered than
Rawls') and you should probably just read it.

### Lecture

_(What follows is my own account of the general thrust of the lecture, which may or
may not align with what was actually said by the lecturer. Use at your own
risk.)_

In the age of mass communication, it's hard to deny the power of a photograph.
The right photograph or, _a fortiori_, video, can open up a world hitherto
unknown to the public and consequently change public sentiment on a scale that
would previously have been unimaginable. The implications of this for social
justice are massive. In the US, during the civil rights era, mass broadcasting
played a transformative role in showing a glimpse of the injustices faced by
black Americans in a way that couldn't be easily ignored by the rest, thus
opening the floodgates to widespread social change.

Now, of course, we live in a networked age. With the ascendence of social media
and the technologies that made it possible, access to the media is much less
gated, and so it's not only journalists who have the power to shape discourse.
Contemporary injustice can be captured on video by a passerby and, from
there, quickly ignite the fury of the world---like when Walter Scott was killed
by a policeman in 2015.

(Tangentially, as I type these notes, it's Sunday, October 1 and I'm watching
[an absolutely mindblowing
video](https://twitter.com/eriksandberg82/status/914464197353852928) showing
Spanish military police going up against Catalonian citizens during the Catalan
referendum. I'd heard about what was happening, but hearing about it and seeing
what it actually looks like on the ground are two very different things. A
good example of the power of imagery.)

Looming on the horizon is the next great age of communication: the intelligent
age. Rather than humans networked with other humans, we now have machines networked
with other machines. At this point, the class is shown a startup promo video,
whose casual tone and cutesy animations completely belie the terrifyingly
misguided (not to mention harmful) nature of what this startup does: [predictive
policing](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/predpol). See if you can
guess the racial composition of its executives before you click the link. The
reasons why this sort of approach to policing is so dangerous were beyond the
scope of the lecture (and hence this post), but you can probably guess. What
happens when the existing biases of society are codified in data and thus used
to direct future actions? What sort of chthonic vicious cycle do we create
then?

#### Course overview

The split between mass, networked, and intelligent communications in the
paragraphs above roughly parallels the division of topics over the course of
this module: over the next nine weeks, we'll spend three weeks on each topic. The
focus will be on the US, because the lecturer is American, but we'll look at
some examples from the Global South.

We'll be focusing on the intersection of history, governance, and theories of
justice, and how that relates to technology. When we consider the governance of
technology, we should remember that it's not just about _governments_; in fact,
we can break down the primary forces for regulation as law, code (as in
software), norms, and markets. These can interact with each other in unexpected
ways---markets can produce the ascendence of corporations that change our
behaviour and thus our norms (for example, by conditioning us give up our data).

#### Theories of justice

In accordance with the readings, we'll be looking at two competing theories of
justice: John Rawls' view, from his 1971 book [_A Theory of
Justice_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/129237.A_Theory_of_Justice), and 
that of Iris Marion Young, from her 1990 book [_Justice and the Politics of
Difference_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/269112.Justice_and_the_Politics_of_Difference).

For comparison, here's a quote from Rawls that was shown in the slides:

> A conception of social justice … is to be regarded as providing in the first
> instance a standard whereby the distributive aspects of the basic structure
> of society are to be assessed.

And here's a quote from Young:

> Justice should refer not only to distribution, but also to the institutional
> conditions necessary for the development and exercise of individual
> capacities and collective communication and cooperation.

(she's really on her consonance game there)

Their theories are almost polar opposites. Rawls is in favour of a liberal
democratic society and believes that to get there, we individuals must come
together from our "original positions", detached from our own personal identity
and history, and rationally figure out how to distribute goods in a fair way.
Everyone should be considered an equal, and we should accordingly distribute
things equally, with inequalities only justifiable if they benefit the
least-advantaged members of society (the "difference principle"). His approach
seems fairly proceduralist & based on the idea that humans are intrinsically
capable of reason and rationality.

Young, on the other hand, does not (and I agree with her) buy into the whole
"original position" theory. History and context _do_ matter; we can no more
shed the cognitive baggage associated with the specific lives we have led than
we can shed our corporeal selves to float free in an ether of bodiless
rationality. A self is not something you just _have_, but rather something you
build, and as such it is inextricably bound up with identity and other worldly
matters. I could write about this all day but instead I'll just refer you to
[David Foster Wallace's essay on
Kafka](https://harpers.org/wp-content/uploads/HarpersMagazine-1998-07-0059612.pdf)
and move on. Young is partial to a _communicative_ democracy, not a liberal
democracy, and believes that we have to consider non-quantifiable inequalities
in addition to quantifiable ones like wealth (think culture or access to
speech). She's interested in justice from a collective, as opposed to an
individual, perspective and emphasises the role that institutions can play in
silently maintaining oppression.

(My summaries above are bound to be tendentious because of my personal views on
the topic, so you should check out the original texts if you want a better
understanding of the difference between these two philosophers.)

Anyway, the whole point of understanding these theories of justice is to
start with some sort of normative framework that will ground us in the weeks to
come, as we take a closer look at the interplay of communication technologies and
justice.

### Seminar

(I'm in seminar group 1, led by the professor.)

#### Icebreaker

As an icebreaker, we were asked to introduce ourselves to each other (in pairs)
and tell the other person where our maternal great-grandmother was born. This
was a very geographically diverse group so we had a ton of different answers,
from those who were very well acquainted with their personal family histories
to those who had absolutely no clue. Personally, I was uncertain, but I would
guess somewhere in Shandong, simply because all of my grandparents are from
Shandong and I don't know where else she would have migrated from. Part of the
reason I'm so uncertain has to do with the Chinese Cultural Revolution, under
which certain members of my family suffered more than most; sadly, lots of
family history was lost or buried in the process. Others had similar reasons
for uncertainty due to, for instance, the chaos of WWII, or the legacy of
colonialism. This was an interesting exercise that highlighted just how
intimately our personal family histories can be bound up with geopolitical
events.

#### The summative essay

A 3000-word essay is due at the beginning of the seminar in week 7. Details
(including potential topics, though we are encouraged to choose our own) can be
found in the "Coursework Questions" document on Moodle.

I asked, given that the essay would be due the beginning of week 7, if we
should limit ourselves to pre-week 7 content (i.e., omitting intelligent
communication). The answer was no---we should feel free to address  any topics that
were or will be mentioned in class---although it was acknowledged that we would
be at a slight advantage if we chose to address something that hadn't yet been
covered.

Someone else asked if we should take a specific approach to the essay (policy
proposal? literature review?), to which the answer was also no: we should feel
free to take whatever approach we want (within reason).

#### What is justice?

At the beginning of the lecture, we were all given post-its on which we were to
write, anonymously, what we each thought "justice" meant. My own personal
definition was very much inspired by having recently read [_Philosophy and
Social
Hope_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/86099.Philosophy_and_Social_Hope) by
the neopragmatist philosopher Richard Rorty, and it had to do with it being a
way of trying to make life better for actually existing human beings, not
backed by an absolute moral force but still an asymptote we should push toward.
Something like that, I can't really remember. You should read Rorty if you want
a better definition (he has some good ones).

At the end of the seminar, we were each given 3 randomly-chosen post-its (there
are 3 seminar groups, and I assume the other groups did the same later) from
earlier and asked to collectively group them by subject on the whiteboard. It
was tricky because a lot of the definitions blended into each other, and it was
hard to prescriptively delineate where one subject should end and the other
begin. (It was also physically tricky because a few mavericks inexplicably
chose to write on the wrong side of their post-it.) In the end, we had the
following groupings (I'm paraphrasing):

* Fairness (the largest subject)
* Equality (which kind of blurred into the fairness one---some of the judgments
  were fairly arbitrary, to be honest)
* Subjective (mine went in here)
* Rule of law (defined in terms of processes and institutions and very much in
  line with Rawls' arguments)
* some others that I have unfortunately forgotten

Another student mentioned that there seemed to be a clear split between those
who thought justice had to do with already existing rules and institutions, and
those who defined in a more subjective or goal-oriented or immanent way. This
is especially notable in light of the theory (alluded to in the lecture) that
institutions are always indelibly shaped by the personal beliefs of the
individuals and groups that create them, and thus are never _neutral_, never
fully unbiased; the degree to which they reinforce or counter existing ideology
depends heavily on the balance of social forces. So the fact that a sizable
chunk of students seem to implicitly trust existing institutions and the rule
of the law (at least when trying to define "justice") says something about the
extent to which they subscribe to that theory, which may itself be due to
personal experiences (or lack thereof) with these institutions. It would be
fascinating to conduct this experiment again at the end of the semester to see
if the definitions have changed.
