---
layout: lecture
topic: "Growing the State, Shrinking Capital: Democracy, Redistribution and Inequality"
title: GV4D4 - week 2
week: 2
course: GV4D4
---

### Readings

#### [Inequality](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23502970-inequality) by Anthony B. Atkinson (chapter 2)

No notes, since I also read this chapter for [SO478 last
week](/posts/SO478-1#inequality-by-anthony-b--atkinson-chapters-1-2) (though I
didn't really take notes then either, tbh).

#### [Capital in the Twenty-First Century](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18736925-capital-in-the-twenty-first-century) by Thomas Piketty (chapters 3-6)

Chapter 3: we look at wealth over time in the UK and France, taking a brief
detour though literature (Balzac, Austen) to illustrate. Early on, land
comprised most of the value of capital, but now it's mostly
housing/industrial/finance. Recall that both the UK and France were imperial
powers with large foreign assets, which allowed them to run up trade deficits
without larger economic problems. In the UK, with cap-inc ratio of 6:1, public
assets are worth one years of NI (slightly less than in France); this is
balanced out by public debt so roughly zero net wealth. Thus most wealth is
private.

One core difference between the two countries has to do with their treatment of
debt. France defaulted on public debt (via inflation?) whereas the UK never
did, and instead financed wars (etc) by borrowing from wealthy citizens, thus
increasing public debt at the same time as private assets (the result of the
British monarchy preferring to borrow money rather than raise taxes). Of course
bondholders get paid interest, too. There was some inflation after both wars
which lowered the value of public debts, but not to the same extent as in
France. Still, this is what prompted Keynes' famous 1936 claim of the
"euthanasia of the rentier", which was influenced by him seeing a collapse of
rentierism as a result of inflation. The UK moved toward a more mixed economy
(stronger welfare state and socialist policies like nationalisation) in the
post-WWII era, which was influenced partly by the success of the Soviet Union
and partly due to suspicions that the economic elite had collaborated with Axis
Powers (mostly true). This resulted in both govts owning around 25-30% of their
nation's wealth by 1950s (though since the UK had massive debts, their net
public wealth was negative until the 60s/70s). In the 70s, of course, things
started to shift: cracks were visible in the Communist bloc, and stagflation +
a tricky geopolitical situation paved the way for increasing liberalisation.

Chapter 4: Now we look at Germany, which is slightly different from the two
cases above mostly because it had no colonial empire. Its capital consisted
mostly of agricultural land. Hyperinflation in the 20s shrank the value of its
post-WWI public debts, but of course that experience also had the effect of
scarring the nation. During/after the wars, asset losses (mainly foreign) were more
significant than physical destruction (revolutionary expropriation,
nationalisation like that of the Suez canal). Plus firms went bankrupt during
the depression, meaning stock/bondholders lost out, which had the effect of
lowering the cap-income ratio and thus inequality.

The US: lots of farmland (which meant value/acre wasn't very high) + populated
mostly by recent immigrants who couldn't bring much capital with them, so
capital low at first. This reflected structural differences in inequality
compared to Europe, as landlords and wealth owners had less power in such a
large country with plenty of arable land for the taking. After WWII, asset
prices remained low, and we saw extremely progressive taxation and lots of
government spending (New Deal), but no nationalisation (unlike in
Europe---wonder why?). Recall that the US was never a true colonial power (at
least not in the same way as the trailblazers over in Europe), and in fact
had a negative net foreign capital during the 19th century. Also note the role
of slavery in US wealth. Canada was similar to US but slightly different
politically due to the legal influence of the UK (no tea partying for us).

Chapter 5: notes from [SO478 last week](/posts/SO478-1#capital-in-the-twenty-first-century-by-thomas-piketty-chapter-5).

Chapter 6: mostly on the capital-labour income split in the 21st century.
Most salient idea: `α=r*β` computes the share of income from capital.

### Lecture

Just going to start off this recap with a bit of heavy editorialising: these
lectures are a _ton_ of fun. If you're at all interested in the politics of
inequality, and have the opportunity to attend these lectures, you should. The
lecturer is very engaging, despite material that can be quite dry at times.
Bonus: he's personally very left-leaning politically, which might not endear
him to any Conservatives in the class, but works for me (and, really, if you're
teaching a class on inequality, you'd _better_ be left-leaning---otherwise,
what would you say, "inequality is fine because I'm rich and I don't really
care that others are poor"?).

Some paraphrased quotes to give you a sense of what the lecturer is like and
what his political views are:

* On Twitter: he's growing increasingly despairing of the level of public
  discourse lately, and exhorts us to be critical of everything we read and
  hear, even if it comes from him
* On Catalonia: lots of misleading information and really total nonsense out
  there (Spanish politics is one of his research areas)
* On political bias: he recently received anonymous feedback from his summer
  school students, some of whom accused him of political bias (probably due, he
  says, to his frequent anti-Trump remarks). Thus he will clarify his political
  views for us: he believes inequality is bad, and that political institutions
  should attempt to lessen it; as a result, he is biased against political
  institutions that increase inqeuality. Everyone is biased, but at least we
  know what his biases are.
* On trust: we should be wary of everything he says, just like you should be
  wary of everything said at the Conservative party conference ... though of
  course _he_ thinks we should agree with him more often than we agree with
  what's said at the Conservative party conference
* On capitalism: he's not going to give us much Hayek in this course. If we
  want an even-handed treatment of the values of capitalism, we're not going to
  find it in this course; instead, we should try the economics or management
  departments instead (he amended this by saying that was mean, and
  apologising). That doesn't mean we should uncritically accept his
  views---he's open to debate, and challenges us to disagree with him (though
  he recognises that it's not that easy given his professorial authority)
* _(At this point God Save the Queen started playing in the room next door, and
  as we were separated from that room only by a very ersatz and lossy
  partition, we were all bombarded with its dulcet tones.)_ "I'm not moved by
  it. Is that a problem? I guess I'm part of the cosmopolitan liberal elite."
* _(Now we're listening to the Sex Pistols.)_ He goes on a brief tangent on the
  Sex Pistols here---he remembers when the Sex Pistols first came out, and
  ruminates on the fact that all those rebellious former youth are now probably
  pensioners

#### Inequality and the welfare state in the 20th century

* the intersection of capitalism and democracy: we managed to build societies
  that assured most people a decent standard of living (at least in rich
  countries)
* followed a massive growth of the state during the industrial age (in
  terms of the % of national income)
* trend of decreasing inequality until the 70s/80s, when it started to rise
  again (hello neoliberalism)
* two different and opposing approaches to explaining inequality changes:
  * political: democracy gives power to the poor and thus pressure for
    redistribution
  * economic: rising inequality is a structural feature of capitalism (the
    consequence of the tendency of capital to accumulate)
* looking at income inequality in France vs America---very different
  * France: dropped a lot mostly during WWII; went up a bit since then, peaked
    in 60s, started rising again in 80s but only barely
  * US: dropped a lot in WWII, mostly stable until late 70s; rising rapidly
    since then (now higher than the max in the late 20s)
  * these two graphs illustrate why this class is biased in favour of the
    political approach

#### Piketty's book

* "Piketty's well-known, much-bought and probably less-read book"
  * apparently the average Kindle reader doesn't get very far (most people stop
    highlighting after page 26)
  * since we'll be reading it, at least we'll be in the top 1% of readers
  * his approach focuses more on the structural features of capitalism,
    specifically the power of capital to accumulate when r > g (and he proposes
    that it always is, at least when conditions are stable---return on capital
    is almost always higher than growth)
  * and of course, capital is unequally distributed (inheritance only makes it
    worse, and Piketty likes to pick on inheritance a lot, especially in his
    newspaper columns)
  * another corollary of low growth: labour income not growing as fast as
    capital
  * capital is becoming a larger factor of production

What is capital? Adam Smith's definition, "from the times before gender-neutral
language was to be expected":

> That part of a man's stock which he expects to afford him revenue is called
> his capital.

Piketty's definition is a little more narrow: basically wealth. And his main
purpose in looking at capital is in calculating the capital-income ratio. If we
look at the composition of capital in the UK over the last three centuries, we
see that the value of agricultural land eroded in the last century, and the
value of domestic capital went down around WWI and has been climbing since
then. Housing, of course, has gone up dramatically in value over the last half
century.

Capital's share of income has gone up somewhat steadily since around '75,
though there has been a recent decline since the crash (capital defined as
rent, profits, interest, dividends, capital gains, etc).

Piketty doesn't do much justice to the poitical dimensions---his book is
focused almost entirely on the structural economic features that result in
greater inequality over time. Which is probably intentional (he is not trying
to explain all the things that might affect inequality, but rather be
meticulous about one particular component of it). Still, it means his take on
inequality is very incomplete.

Other criticisms:

* a lot of historical data is just estimates (probably not very precise)
* he has a very narrow definition of capital as wealth (excludes human)
* the rate of return is never actually uniformly constant, but he assumes it is
  for the purpose of making his calculations easier
* the politics of redistribution, property rights, and financialisation are all
  incredibly relevant to the narrative but are mostly ignored

#### Our approach: the political and social institutions

This includes: political party scene, constitution, pre- and redistribution,
welfare institutions, macroeconomic policy. We'll be looking at two core
(compatible) factors that explain changes in inequality:

* democracy leads to greater redistribution
* political ideational change, from Keynes to Friedman/Hayek (Mont Pelerin)

The latter helps explain growth/reduction of government size as well as the
difference between the distribution of votes and the distribution of (post-tax)
income.

Meltzer/Richards' simple model for explaining individual voter behaviour:
individuals want to maximise income with a minimum amount of effort. Since the
government taxes in order to redistribute, and the median voter has below
average income, they vote for greater government spending as a way of getting
more redistribution. Thus one could conclude that the government would grow and
grow and grow. This prediction was made in 1980 and we all know what happened
since then :(

Problems with this theory: it ignores institutional dynamics. For one,
increased state spending doesn't necessarily reduce inequality, depending on
the political situation (maybe the money goes towards tax breaks for large
corporate donors?). It also assumes that people are really "rational" in the
sense proposed. But many voters act irrationally (according to an economist)
or don't have all the available information or believe in myths. Or they might
prioritise other factors (cultural or religious ideas---national identity,
pride, guns, abortion) over material factors! So they might end up voting in
politicians that will take away their healthcare or otherwise do real material
damage to them and still not regret it (partly because they might not have
thought there was a better choice, and partly because they don't understand the
causality). In general, people tend to be "cognitive misers" who take mental
shortcuts and vote out of habit. (Like the lecturer, who says he votes Labour
"out of habit".)

A summary of the ideational changes in macroeconomic policy:

* 19th century: classical econ (Smith, Ricardo?) w/ self-regulating markets and
  the idea that poverty is natural
* then along came Keynes (early 20th) who challenged those ideas, suggesting
  that the government SHOULD intervene in markets when necessary (so the growth
  of the state isn't just for greater redistribution, but also about the
  government taking a greater role in the wider economy)
* then in the 70s some free marketers came along and the rest is neoliberal
  history
* it's kind of funny to think that a year ago, I wouldn't really have
  understood any of this, but in the past year I've read approximately a
  million books about precisely this view of economic history so now it's all
  old news (shoutout to Verso for their excellent sales)

We can think of political/economic ideas as having a key mediating role between
forces (democracy and capitalism).

### Seminar

_(I'm in seminar group 3, which actually takes place the Thursday after the
lecture. Run by the lecturer.)_

#### Introductions

We started with introductions (where we're from, and why we care about
inequality). Pretty cool distribution of countries, mostly throughout Western
Europe, the Middle East, and Asia (each country was represented by only 1 or 2
people). I mentioned my background in the tech industry and how I was
radicalised partly by what I saw in the adtech space and partly by Trump, and
that I've been reading a lot of critical theory and leftist political stuff
since then. Hopkin's response was encouraging---he'd never really gotten into
critical theory (academia moves too slowly for him to switch topics easily),
but he finds it interesting, and in general would like us to take a more
critical approach to the texts we read.

#### Is inequality a political or economic phenomenon?

_(Summarising the discussion.)_

Obviously it's both. There's a bit of a chicken-and-egg element as
well---political decisions are usually made in response to changing
macroeconomic conditions, and these decisions further shape the economy.
Piketty's book is definitely more of an economic approach but he does mention
some political elements. Atkinson's book focuses more on social policies.

Other things mentioned:

* one student brought up that the economy is a human invention, and if we treat
  inequality as a more economic phenomenon then we shift responsibility away
  from political actors and thus destroy our own agency
* another student responded that the economy is actually quite a natural
  phenomenon, as people have always traded, and money/capital is a natural
  human thing (a POV I kind of disagree with but also kind of sympathise with)
* someone else: political leaders are constrained in the choices they can make,
  given the ever-present of spectre of capital flight

#### Piketty's argument

* it's all about wealth compounding---he deliberately removed the political
  component to show that the underlying economic forces are moving us toward
  greater inequality
* if the capital-to-income ratio is growing then we automatically get greater
  inequality, with the obvious implications for social mobility with policies
  the way they are today (incomplete inheritance tax, increasingly privatised
  education, nepotism, etc)
* that's really the core of what Piketty is saying: the Kuznets curve is wrong
* but of course this is all a pretax discussion, which means that an efficient
  redistribution system could theoretically manage the increasing inequality
  (sadly, we know that it doesn't work in practice, thanks to tax
  evasion/avoidance)
* Piketty's proposal for a global wealth tax was brought up, and several
  students opined that it seemed too difficult to implement. I then brought up
  Slavoj Žižek's wonderful take on it, which comes from [Trouble in Paradise
  (link goes to the specific
  quote)](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/note/1556). Žižek is implying---and
  I'm inclined to agree---that Piketty is proposing a solution that appears
  nearly impossible in our current capitalist world order _precisely_ to point
  out the untenability of the current system. There's a gap between what
  Piketty proposes and the fundamental contradictions within capitalism that
  (with Marx, though not in name) Piketty spends 600 pages pointing out
* on Marx's suggestion that the rate of profit tends to fall over time, which
  seemingly contradictions with Piketty's assumption that r is always > g: my
  response to that is that Marx is talking about specific industries, but
  overall it's true due to creative destruction (also due to financialisation
  but that's a separate matter). I need to understand this better myself
  though

#### Leftwing vs rightwing governments

Another student mentioned that at least in the UK, left-wing governments tend
to focus on income redistribution, whereas right-wing governments tend to focus
on wealth redistribution (at least in theory) with the right-to-buy and similar
practices. Perhaps this is because the Tories are trying to raise the status of
capital to get everyone to buy into the collective capitalist dream? In any
case, that's an example of public policy affecting the distribution of capital
(so it's not just limited to market forces).

#### The US versus Europe

The capital-income ratio was significantly higher in Europe than in the US near
the beginning of the charts, which would imply that the US would be more equal.
And indeed it was, near the beginning! At least until the wars, when the value
of capital was reduced dramatically in Europe (physically or otherwise). Think
about why the trend has reversed since then. Did post-WWII American hegemony
assure America's current dismal place in the inequality rankings? Why did the
political scenes of most European countries move so much more leftward?
