---
layout: lecture
topic: Introduction
title: SO478 - week 1
week: 1
course: SO478
---

### Reading

#### Advance reading

[What's wrong with inequality?](https://theconversation.com/whats-wrong-with-inequality-43252)
from The Conversation. In short: we should maximise the well-being of the
least well off, just in case that happens to be us one day (mentions Rawls'
theory of justice). We do need some (I assume material?) incentives to ensure
that people do the difficult jobs, but they should not result in unmanageable
inequalities.  The main thing to realise is that inequality can prevent people
from making full use of their opportunities, which results in inefficiency.
In that vein, a slightly higher rate of growth should not be enough to justify
too much inequality.

[Defending the One Percent](https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/mankiw/files/defending_the_one_percent_1.pdf)
by N. Gregory Mankiw. I hadn't actually heard of this guy before, so I came
to the paper with pretty much a blank slate, and I left absolutely hating him.
Reading this paper was a very infuriating experience. Basically, this guy
is an economist at Harvard who also happens to have very strongly conservative
views, which are extremely evident in this paper. Like the paper is covered in
the stains of his centre-right ideology and fetish for the profit motive. I
have much worse things to say about the paper but I'll spare you the bulk of
them. I took copious notes while reading this and considered trying to type
them up, but I think that would make me too angry. Instead, I'll just say that
this guy completely misses the role that cultural hegemony plays in maintaining
capitalist realism, and that it is possible for us to transition to a culture
where the profit motive is disregarded and we don't value things solely based
on financial considerations; in fact, we're already there in some ways and
areas. The Mammon-worshipping world that serves as the context for his
arguments does not only fail to adequately describe our world today, it is also
not the world most of _want_ to live in, and, with any luck, we'll figure out
how to build a much better one, with or without the assistance of Dr. Mankiw.

[The 4 biggest reasons why inequality is bad for society](https://ideas.ted.com/the-4-biggest-reasons-why-inequality-is-bad-for-society/)
from ideas.ted.com. A much more relaxing read. 1) Wealthy people have power
over the poor, which undermines their personal liberty; 2) Political
institutions are weakened; 3) Inefficiency stemming from intergenerational
inequality which itself suppresses equality of opportunity; 4) Paves the way
for a [legitimation crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legitimation_crisis)
(the article doesn't use that specific phrase but it's a nice Habermasian way
of putting it).

#### Core reading

[Inequality: What Can Be Done?](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23502970-inequality)
by Anthony B. Atkinson, chapters 1 and 2. I've read this book before (and saved
some passages I found interesting in
[Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/book/inequality-what-can-be-done))
but it's been a while so I figured I'd re-read the first two chapters to
refresh my memory. The book is a little too light on the mechanics of
capitalism for my liking, but he does a good job of talking about the softer
economic and moral arguments against inequality (both of outcome and of
opportunity): it prevents merit from being fully realised, and thus destroys
social cohesion. He provides a good overview of various methodological
approaches to measuring inequality and the caveats associated with each.

[Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/27311800-global-inequality)
by Branko Milanović, chapter 1. Compared to the Atkinson book above, I thought
Milanović went deeper into the larger economic factors that affect inequality,
which I appreciated. He talks about neoliberalism and how, as a result, the
biggest benefactors of globalisation have been the rich---not necessarily
because of anything inherent to globalisation, but because it has been
manipulated to protect the interests of the ruling class. Some interesting
points on the effects of the financial crisis on the top 1% (many of whom lost
money during the crisis but have since managed to gain it all back, roughly
speaking) and the consequent rise in global asset prices.

[Capital in the Twenty-First Century](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18736925-capital-in-the-twenty-first-century)
by Thomas Piketty, chapter 5. The book that everyone who wants to seem erudite
has on their bookshelf but that no one has read. (I haven't read it either.)
Primarily is about the capital/income ratio (which Piketty defines as β=s/g,
savings over growth). In the golden age years, income was growing faster than
wealth, but around the mid-70's, wealth start to outpace income growth and so
it began to pile up, which had the predictable consequence of reversing
inequality trends. This chapter is a lot more technical and focused than the
other readings (which makes sense, considering it's a 600+ page book). Some
topics coverd: asset bubbles, dividends being taxed more than capital gains
(providing an incentive to reinvest), foreign asset ownership, and
financialization (which he defines by the value of assets rising more than net
wealth).

### Lecture

Various graphs showing economic inequality from different perspectives (mostly
income, but a few for wealth). We all already know most of these stats, all of
which support a terrifying narrative: that the top 1% own a staggering amount
of wealth (and that share is increasing). Hence why we're all here.

Some topics covered:

* Data usually comes from either surveys (which are very subjective and don't
  always get answered by the people you want to measure) or income tax data
  (which can be falsified)
* Adjusting for household size: lots of different ways, each with pros and
  cons. Important because inequality figures vary dramatically depending on
  whether you assume household income is shared equally or not
* Pen's parade: imagine if people's heights were scaled to their income
* 90:10 ratio, for pre-tax income percentiles
* Gini coefficient: area below y=x and above Lorenz curve; the problem is that
  it treats poor-middle disparities the same as middle-rich disparities
* when conducting inequality research, you're always working with out-of-date
  data, so you have to be careful about using the present tense to describe
  trends. case in point: Labour's Blue Book, showing that inequality fell
  from 1947-1974, was published in 1974; shortly after that, inequality went
  way up (hello neoliberalism)
* global stats are tricky to unpack because they combine multiple, often
  countervailing trends (e.g., the rise of China's middle class)
* wealth is substantially more unequal than income, for obvious ROI-related
  reasons

### Seminar

For the seminar, we were arbitrarily divided into two groups to facilitate a
debate on inequality. I was put in the "inequality is good" camp, and my main
contribution consisted of putting my Extremely Capitalist hat on and taking
that approach to its logical conclusion. To wit---inequality is good because we
_need_ some level of (economic) inequality to enable capitalism to function. We
need a reserve army of labour to discipline labour. We need people who are
unemployed, or underemployed, in order to keep the system politically stable:
workers need to know that there are myriad others who would be happy to take
their job should they ever slack off. If we want to ensure that people continue to
go to jobs they hate, we have to give them something to fear, in the spectre of
homelessness and starvation. Any attempts at alleviating inequality through
making poverty less brutal are _bad for capitalism_--anything that might
empower labour is bad for capital, and so capitalism itself is undermined. And
we should make capitalism the _telos_ of our existence.

This is an argument that I have never heard anyone seriously make but that
appears to drive a lot of policy decisions, if only subconsciously. To clarify,
I think it's a stupid argument, with the last line being the crux of my proof
by contradiction---the axiom that we should put capitalism first, that we
should enshrine a system we have constructed over _the very thing that system
was constructed to serve_, is clearly patently absurd. But it's (imo) at the
root of a lot of defenses of the economic system as it is now, so I think its
important to understand.

I was then asked, very sensibly, what I thought of the fact that capitalism is
destroying our planet. To which I replied: well, who really cares, we can just
invest in space travel and move on to a new planet. I call this the Elon Musk
approach to capitalist apologetics.

Some other arguments in favour of inequality included: it drives innovation and
growth (a more palatable version of my point); it's part of human nature and so
there's no _a priori_ reason we need to get rid of it; it's only fair that
people be materially rewarded according to their contributions. The arguments
on the other side came down to either the practical (too much of it results in
inefficiency or loss of social cohesion) or the moral (appealing to the
intrinsic human right to self-determination or principles of equality).

It was a fun exercise, but it soon became clear that the two sides were focused
on two very different questions: the "inequality is good" people seized on the
downsides of trying to eradicate inequality, whereas the "inequality is bad"
people extolled the virtues of _reducing_ inequality. Which, I think, sums up
the standard arguments for and against inequality. Those who don't like the
idea of reducing it tend to characterise their opponents as trying to get rid
of it entirely, whereas many of them would probably be happy with just a little
less of it. Of course, this raises the question of whether there is an
acceptable level of inequality, and how you could either define or collectively
decide on it. I don't know. Personally, I like to think of absolute equality as
this asymptote we know we'll never reach but should still keep moving towards.
Kind of like how you know that your house will never be completely clean _but
that doesn't mean you should stop cleaning it_.

If I were on the "inequality is bad" side, but still wanted to frame my
argument in economic terms in order to appeal to those who don't care about
inequality for moral reasons, I would take the obverse of my argument from
before. Namely: if we want to maintain the legitimacy of capitalism, we need to
prevent it from undermining itself via its internal contradictions. Capitalist
ideology simultaneously impugns the idea of public services and
taking care of the weakest members of society _while still benefiting from it_,
in the provision of willing workers and consumers. All the ostensibly
anti-inequality redistribution that goes on now is actually just propping up
the capitalist system as such---instead of actively reducing inequality, its
goal is to keep it at a safe level such that capitalism can continue along its
rails. Those who are pro-capitalism but anti-inequality reduction are suffering
from a level of cognitive dissonance: they clearly do not understand the
long-term consequences of their actions, not just in terms of infringing on
people's quality of life but in terms of (possibly
irreparably) damaging the structure of capitalism as a whole. If you make
things bad enough, eventually people will prefer a violent revolution or even
just death to the way things are, and if you're not actively trying to make
things better, you are walking a very dangerous tightrope, simply because
the tides of capitalism are constantly pushing us toward the shore of greater
inequality.

In the end, I think my ideological opposition to inequality comes from wanting
to look at the system from first principles: what is the economy for? What do
we want it to accomplish, and how much has the current iteration of it drifted
from that original purpose? After all, all the systems (economic and otherwise)
that we've built are just an attempt at figuring out the best way for us to
live our fleeting lives while peacefully coexisting with each other. They are
means to an end, not an end in themselves. We would do well to remember that
more often.
