---
layout: lecture
topic: "Marx’s theory of the state and the role of social classes"
title: GV4G7 - week 5
week: 5
course: GV4G7
---

### Readings

#### [An introduction to Karl Marx](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/238955.An_Introduction_to_Karl_Marx) by Jon Elster (chapters 7, 8)

Chapter 7: trying to define classes. The list below is criticised later on.

> There are some fifteen groups that Marx refers to as classes:
bureaucrats and theocrats in the Asiatic mode of production; freemen,
slaves, plebeians, and patricians under slavery; lord, serf,
guild master, and journeyman under feudalism; industrial capitalists,
financial capitalists, landlords, peasantry, petty bourgeoisie,
and wage laborers under capitalism. (p124)

> Having rejected income, occupation, and status as criteria of
class, four more plausible definitions must be considered: property,
exploitation, market behavior, and domination. All have been
seriously proposed by followers or scholars of Marx. With the
exception of exploitation, all turn out to be necessary elements in
the final, reconstructed definition. (p125)

> Most frequently, class membership is defined by the ownership
or lack of ownership of the means of production. For Marx's purpose,
this definition cannot be the whole story, although it surely
is an important part of it. (p126)

on being forced to sell your labour-power as a decent def (thought: how do women, most of whom could easily marry and thus be free from the need to sell their labour-power, fit into this?)

> [...] there is transfer
of surplus from below; on the other, transfer of commands from
above. Note that transfer of surplus is not the same as exploitation.
Surplus is transferred from the capitalist tenant to the landowner,
but the latter does not exploit the former. They are both exploiters,
living off the labor of the workers they exploit. (p128)

> [...] Since Tocqueville, the following two propositions have been widely
accepted. First, collective action is more likely to be generated by
small inequalities than by large ones, because the latter are usually
seen as immutable, quasinatural facts of the society in which one is
living. Second, revolutions are more likely to occur when conditions
have begun to improve than when they are stably bad, because
expectations about further improvement tend to outrun the
actual possibilities and thus to generate frustration. (p133)

Chapter 8: on why the bourgeoisie doesn't take power

> There are two perspectives on politics in Marx's writings. On the one hand, politics is part of the superstructure and hence of
the forces that oppose social change. The political system stabilizes
the dominant economic relations. On the other hand, politics is a
medium for revolution and hence for social change. New relations
of production are ushered in by political struggles.  To see the
relation between the two functions of politics, they must be seen in
the wider context of historical materialism. This theory affirms that
new relations of production emerge when and because the existing
ones cease to be optimal for the further development of the
productive forces: This is the ultimate explanation of a change in
the economic relations. In this transition, political struggle has no
independent causal force. It acts as a midwife, bringing about what
is doomed to come about sooner or later. (p141)

> [...] Revolution is
more likely to occur in a society where the level of development
has not reached the stage where widespread concessions to the
workers are affordable - but at that stage a communist revolution
will also be premature, as far as the ability to develop the productive
forces is concerned. These problems were at the root of the
controversy between Mensheviks and Bolsheviks in the Russian
socialist movement. The former wanted the workers to pull their
punches in the struggle with the capitalists, so that capitalism
could have the time to reach the stage at which a viable communism
could be introduced. The latter argued, more realistically,
that by postponing the revolution one would take it off the agenda
for good. (p161)

#### [Karl Marx: selected writings](https://global.oup.com/ukhe/product/karl-marx-selected-writings-9780198782650), edited by David McLellan

Sections:

* The Class Struggles in France
* The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
* The Civil War in France
* Articles for the Neue Reinische Zeitung
* Circular letter

#### Political Philosophy: Marx and Radical Democracy

Marx's views on the state as building on Aristotle, Hegel, Kant

> Marx is often thought to offer two distinct theories of the state in exploitative, class-divided societies. In the first conception, he saw it as an alien body over and above society (On the Jewish Question, The Eighteenth Brumafue of Louis Bonaparte, The Civil War in France); in the second, he interpreted it primarily as the servant of a ruling class against workers, peâsants, and other oppressed groups (Communist Manifesto). In fact, Marx ioined these conceptions, recognizing the partial autonomt given specific social conflicts, of government policies
yet capturing their generally repressive core. (p173)

### Lecture

* we can see politics as downstream from economic relations (early marx)
* later marx: politics can be instrumental for social change
* on class: basic unit of social struggle
	* theres no concrete definition, instead a series of factors
* role of state in containing free rider problem, kinda like tragedy of the commons, preventing capitalists from individually overexploiting say women/children which would be detrimental in the long run for social repro
* 1846, anti-corn law league dissolved in england (league made up of bourgeoisie)
* 1848, revolution, marx thought the bourgeoisie had taken control of the french state
* 1851 louis napoleon seized power in france bringing second repblic to an end
	* marx was puzzled by this, instrumental view of the state not enough for explaining why bourgeoisie didnt take control of the state even tho it could have
	* as a result he developed a more complex theory: abdication theory of the state
	* where it appears to be autonomous  and independent from dominant social class
	* but ofc the bourgeois benefits indirectly from this way of running the state
	* doesnt determine its functions but it does constrain what the state can do (taxation)
	* good way of containing class struggle cus then the proletariat have to wage a two-front war to free themselves
* his theory of the state developed in stages
	* tension between emanciptory potential & its use as an instrument of the ruling classes
* now onto q of what happens to state under communism
	* does it wither away? (added by engels i think) is he referring to bourgeois state?
