---
layout: lecture
topic: "The materialist conception of history"
title: GV4G7 - week 1
week: 1
course: GV4G7
---

### Readings

#### [Why Read Marx Today?](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/51644.Why_Read_Marx_Today) by Jonathan Wolff (misc selections)

It's a short book, so I just read the whole thing (some notes in [Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/book/why-read-marx-today)). His coverage of various Marxist concepts seemed decent (I don't really have enough knowledge to judge with any level of discernment) but his conclusions felt suspect to me. Worth reading though.

#### [Karl Marx: selected writings](https://global.oup.com/ukhe/product/karl-marx-selected-writings-9780198782650), edited by David McLellan

This will be the reference text for all the primary readings. Sections for this week:

* German Ideology ([Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/s/the-german-ideology)
* Letter to Annenkov ([Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/s/letter-to-annenkov))
* Grundrisse ([Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/s/grundrisse))
* Preface to a Critique of Political Economy ([Bookmarker](http://bookmarker.dellsystem.me/s/preface-to-a-critique-of-political-economy))

#### Forces and Relations of Production by G. A. Cohen

Recommended reading. No clue what book this is found in.

His core thesis (which he ascribes to Marx) that he states at the outset is that:

> history is, fundamentally, the growth of human productive power, and that forms of society rise and fall according as they enable and promote, or prevent and discourage, that growth.

Defining relations of production (p13):

> Relations of production are relations of economic power, of the economic power people enjoy or lack over labour power and means of production. In a capitalist society relations of production include the economic power capitalists have over means of production, the economic power workers (unlike slaves) have over their own labour power, and the lack of economic power workers have over means of production.

Distinguishing between the forces of production, the base, and the superstructure:

> Now the sum total of relations of production in a given society is said to constitute the economic structure of that society, which is also called - in relation to the superstructure - the basis, or base, or foundation. The economic structure or base therefore consists of relations of production only: it does not include the productive forces. [...] the forces [...] are below the economic foundation, the ground on which it rests.

On his definition of "superstructure" being a lot narrower than others (this chapter is limited to consideration of the legal order):

>  It is certainiy false that every non-economic social phenomenon is superstructural: artistic creation, for example, is demonstrably not, as such, superstructural for Marx.

On the transition between one mode of relations to another (when they've become fetters):

> it is because ruling classes have an interest in the maintenance of obsolete relations that their _immediate_ replacement by freshly suitable relations is not to be expected. People do not rush towards the dustbin of history just as soon as they have played out their historical role. (p17)

He's very insistent that the explanatory claims of historical materialism are functional (as opposed to deterministic? not entirely sure), as otherwise he can't reconcile (3) and (5) with (6) and (7):

> (3) the level of development of productive power explains the nature of the economic structure
> (5) the economic structure explains the nature of the superstructure
> (6) the economic structure promotes the development of the productive forces
> (7) the superstructure stabilizes the economic structure. (all p18)

He spends a couple of pages talking about class struggle and its relationship to the forces of production (complicated, as far as I can tell)---class struggle can bring about social change, and yet the ultimate success of class struggle also depends on the level of development of the production forces. I guess I agree overall though I should probably read more of his work to better understand his POV.

#### [Rationality and Class Struggle](https://newleftreview-org.gate2.library.lse.ac.uk/I/123/andrew-levine-erik-olin-wright-rationality-and-class-struggle) by Andrew Levine and Erik Olin Wright

Recommended reading. Published in the _New Left Review_ I/123, September-October 1980. Draws on Marx's _Preface to a Critique of Political Economy_ from the readings above.

They summarise Cohen's _Karl Marx’s Theory of History_ (possibly where the reading above comes from?), boiling it down to a defence of the Primary Thesis in Marx's _Preface_:

> the nature of a set of production relations is explained by the level of development of the productive forces embraced by it (to a far greater extent than vice versa)

I gave up midway through ... way too dry for me sorry

### Lecture

* the origins of historical materialism can be found in _German Ideology_
	* blending together Hegel's historical idealism and the ahistorical materialism found in the Hobbesian tradition
	* also builds on Scottish economists (just Smith I think, Ricardo wasn't Scottish?) in the "lonely fisherman" tradition, as well as French politics (utopian socialism)
* thesis: that individual needs are based on materiality and determine actions
	* needs are incremental, build on neach other and become more abstract, as a response to development in productive forces
* we can separate the production of life into natural and social relations
* division of labour -> disposing of others' labour-power (the product becomes private property)
* relations of production can become fetters if the forces are sufficiently developed, at which point tensions arise -> rupture (revolution, etc)
* an open question in Marxism today
	* what is the correspondence between the forces & relations?
	* the orthodox explanation (see Ochen) is the functionalist one is that the relations are the ones that are "most suitable" for the given forces, as it's in the "interest" of the forces to have the relations in a certain way

### Seminar

I re-read my notes from the seminar and realised that most of what I wrote was already in the readings (which I hadn't done by the time of the seminar). Only a few notes below.

* What is the "historical" component of historical materialism?
	* long arc of history
	* world is not built anew at every moment, the world we inhabit follows from past choices and features
	* ongoing process of accrual
	* building on Hegel, we need to understand history to understand the present
* What is "material" component?
	* the primacy of material needs in determining society and thought (Marx inverts Hegel here)
* Is HM deterministic?
	* it's teleological but it leaves space for human agency at the class level, in conjunction with sufficiently developed productive forces
