---
title: "Every billionaire is a policy failure"
layout: fragment
description: "More thoughts on why extreme wealth concentration is bad, in light of the recent news that a billionaire offered to pay off some lucky graduates' student loan debt."
tags:
- inequality
- game-of-thrones
---

There's a common refrain on the left when it comes to the presence of extreme wealth: "Every billionaire is a policy failure".

It's a memorable adage, and a useful one insofar as it highlights the link between distribution of wealth and politics, something that should be obvious but which is often forgotten in our post-political era. Billionaires are not natural - the policies that allow them to mint that wealth (through inheritance, or starting companies, or paying minimal tax) are not necessities, but rather political choices. We can make different choices, by find alternative ways to keep the economy running without having to make a few well-placed individuals unfathomably rich.

Of course, not everyone agrees with the idea that billionaires are policy failures; a cursory search for the term will dig up no end of articles claiming that billionaires are good, actually (here's a [puff piece](https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/437554-every-billionaire-is-not-a-policy-failure-far-from-it) written by the CEO of some random libertarian think tank, which somehow manages to claim that entrepreneurs aren't even motivated by wealth while still presuming that they need to make that much money to continue working). You could argue that the choice of "billionaire" is arbitrary (why not millionaire?) or that it ignores relative wealth inequality (if the average income is 100 million, then the existence of billionaires isn't that bad). Both of which are true, but like, it kind of doesn't matter. The statement isn't meant as a universal and static truth; it's meant as a critique of the system we have right now.

The point of using "billionaire", in a world where 99+% of people are not billionaires, is to build the largest coalition possible by grounding the critique in material realities. Inequality is a spectrum, not a binary; everyone has a different idea of what an acceptable amount of inequality is, and there is no easy way to come to a consensus on this front. "Billionaire" works here simply because it's so outrageous - you can imagine spending a million dollars in a lifetime, and maybe even ten million, but a billion? You'd earn more in interest than you would be able to spend in a year. It's a completely different ballpark, and it elevates you from the realm of "spending money in order to live" to "spending money as a means of exercising power over the future of humanity".

Now, the latter is a problem because the person holding this power is unelected, and is not directly accountable to anyone. And there's really no reason to assume that someone who has managed to accumulate billions of dollars through whatever means is necessarily well-suited to decide the future of humanity.

You could argue that this characterisation is an exaggeration, because the existence of billionaires doesn't necessarily imply a worrisome amount of power over the future of humanity. But if they made this money through entrepreneurship, then it is the result of telling people [how to spend their time](/posts/fragments-141), and having control over how a lot of people spend their time means you have some say in the future of humanity. And any time they spend this money - investing it somewhere, or directly hiring people - they are exerting control over others, and the more money they have, the more control they can exert.

Of course, it's _theoretically_ possible that billionaires would only choose to spend money in ways that are purely benevolent - rather than hiring private chefs or slowly [taking over an island in Hawaii](https://gizmodo.com/a-trip-inside-mark-zuckerberg-s-sprawling-embattled-co-1833142966), they could choose to spend it the same way that we would have done democratically. But it's not practically possible, because if being a billionaire did not grant you outsized privileges relative to others, then we wouldn't really care about it, and we certainly wouldn't call it "billionaire" (the way we don't grant semantic priority to people who have a ton of Pokemon cards, because having lots of Pokemon cards isn't very relevant to how our economy works). The point at which being a billionaire does not compromise others' freedom in some way is the point at which being a billionaire doesn't _mean_ anything. We simply wouldn't be talking about it the same way; Forbes would not be compiling wealth lists; and journalists wouldn't bother identifying people as billionaires. The whole point of being a billionaire is having power over lots of other people.

But maybe this is okay? Maybe this centralisation of power is regrettable, but unavoidable, because it's the price we pay for a dynamic economy?

I don't think this is true (I think we could still have innovation and creativity and hard work under a different economic system), but even if we did accept this possibility, there are still unforeseen consequences. Power creates its own logic; it warps the field of what is seems good, or possible, or necessary.

If you'll bear with me for another _Game of Thrones_ [analogy](/fragments/tags#game-of-thrones), look at what happened to Daenerys during the course of her storyline: she started off with good intentions, but the process of attaining power corrupted her, and gave rise to new imperatives (like, endless war to "liberate" people who have never asked her to liberate them). In a similar way, as capitalism chugs along and wealth continues to concentrate, we're seeing the rise of new incentives, new dynamics, new forces. Even if capitalism _began_ as the most optimal way to improve people's lives at the time, in our current era, it seems clear that improving people's lives is not the primary motive. Instead, much of the current system seems devoted to ways of making the rich richer while keeping the poor poor. Time, perhaps, to stab it in the heart.

***

Recently, billionaire Robert F. Smith gave a commencent address at Morehouse College (a historically black university in Atlanta) where he announced that he was going to pay off the student loans for everyone in the 2019 graduating class.

(Cue the usual inane headlines, like this one from the _Washington Post_: [Robert Smith pledged to pay off Morehouse graduates’ student loans. Is this fair to families who saved?](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/05/23/robert-smith-pledged-pay-off-morehouse-graduates-student-loans-is-this-fair-families-who-saved/?) No, you're right, it's not fair, just like a vaccine for polio is not fair to anyone who contracted polio, therefore people should continue to suffer from polio forever.)

Now, there are several ways of viewing this incident. One way involves approval and commendation: good for him for giving back! If you're an especially optimistic person, you could even go so far as to conclude that the system must be working fine, because billionaires are stepping up to help society's fix problems. Billionaires are entitled to their wealth because they're deploying it towards good causes, so we should be happy to let them keep it.

But that would be much too optimistic of a reading. The majority of wealth owned by billionaires is not going to 'good causes' like this one - it's going toward , or just sitting idly in a fund (returns for doing noiothing), fund startups that exploit people for the purpose of making a few men richer. The reason this incident made the headlines is precisely because it's rare. It's exceptional. Even those who do pledge to donate most of their wealth to good causes often still [expect a return](https://newsocialist.org.uk/how-to-profit-from-poverty/), and in any case, they have enough wealth that donating most of it doesn't prevent them from living in total luxury.

What Smith did - however magnanimous it may seem - should be understood as the bare minimum someone should do if see they others suffering and have the means to alleviate it. It's not Smith's _fault_ that that the economic system which made him a billionaire is so cruel to everybody else, but neither does his tiny act of generosity exculpate the system.

If we accept the adage that every billionaire is a policy failure, then one aim of politics should be to create an economy that does not create billionaires - i.e., a world where no billionaires are possible.

But, you might ask, if there are no billionaires, who would pay off lucky graduates' student debts? The answer is: no one, because there would be no student debt in the first place. Students shouldn't have to be in thrall to the caprices of billionaires merely to avoid a life without the shackles of predatory student loan programs.

Massive wealth consolidation at the top, crushing amounts of debt for everybody else ... these are two sides of the same coin, stemming from an economic system that increasingly favours those who own capital while disenfranchising those who don't. Within these constraints, sure, the benevolence of billionaires is better than nothing. What we really want, though, is a system that doesn't require billionaires to be benevolent in the first place.
