---
title: "April recap"
layout: fragment
description: "A summary of the last 30 posts."
tags:
- recap
---

## This month's recap

(These no longer have new descriptions by default. I'm sorry. I got lazy.)

* **[91: If tech job postings were honest](/posts/fragments-91)**. For execs: money, more money, and protection from getting #MeToo'd. For contractors: tepid pay and working conditions, but if you complain you get fired.
* **[92: When your startup turns sour (on npm)](/posts/fragments-92)**. It's time to make money, which means: cost-cutting, layoffs, and a desperate rush to turn the product into a revenue engine, no matter how much that damages reputation. _(A fictionalised postmortem of what went wrong at npm, Inc, a for-profit company that maintains the node.js package manager.)_
* **[93: On YouTube's engagement-driven recommendations](/posts/fragments-93)**. Reflections on today's Bloomberg piece about YouTube's unwillingness to stop recommending toxic videos in order to preserve high 'engagement'.
* **[94: When gatekeeping is legitimate](/posts/fragments-94)**. Some amount of gatekeeping in tech is valid, because not everyone is suited for every role. The problem is when the incentives are distorted by economic factors.
* **[95: When the seas rise](/posts/fragments-95)**. I have still not come to terms with the fact that things could be catastrophic, and I'm not sure how I ever could. _(Reflections on an article about the rise of sunny-day flooding in Miami.)_
* **[96: The billionaire who wants to reform capitalism](/posts/fragments-96)**. Hedge fund manager Ray Dalio thinks that capitalism needs to be reformed. Who cares. _(More broadly, I think the political views of anyone with an outsize degree of power should be treated with suspicion.)_
* **[97: Workplace surveillance](/posts/fragments-97)**. Workplace surveillance is more than merely an issue of privacy. It's about power, and control, and deepening a relation of class domination.
* **[98: Eero's fire sale](/posts/fragments-98)**. The seemingly singular story of a distressed startup's acquisition which inadvertently reveals the con embedded within capitalism.
* **[99: Why Peter Thiel praises monopolies](/posts/fragments-99)**. Thoughts on Peter Thiel's political belief system and the unstated assumptions buried within it. _(The gist of it is that he thinks monopolies are good when they are run by people like himself, because people like himself are intrinsically good.)_
* **[100: Gratitude is a trap](/posts/fragments-100)**. How dare you criticise a system that provided you with the means of criticising it in the first place? You should be grateful. _(A follow-up to [fragment 51](/posts/fragments-51), which challenges the idea that it's hypocritical to criticise capitalism if you own an iPhone.)_
* **[101: If the market doesn't give us affordable housing ...](/posts/fragments-101)**. An elegant way to fix the housing crisis would be to take housing out of the market sphere. Here's one way we could do that. _(tl;dr: reduce the amount of profit that can be made through providing housing, and if the market fails to deliver on housing as a result, use that as an opportunity to evade the market entirely by building more social housing.)_
* **[102: There are experts, and there are experts](/posts/fragments-102)**. Liberals love to scorn conservatives' dismissal of so-called 'experts'. But there is no ultimate technocratic authority to appeal to. _(In other words: being recognised as an "expert" doesn't mean you are free from ideology.)_
* **[103: Insulin as a public service](/posts/fragments-103)**. The public health crisis created by rising insulin costs is a strong argument for public provision of important drugs. This isn’t as impractical as it sounds.
* **[104: Unbundling progress](/posts/fragments-104)**. How can we criticise capitalism if it's brought us so much progress? _(A follow-up to fragment 100, on gratitude being a trap, and a rejoinder to the Pinker-esque line which dismisses today's high levels of inequality on the grounds that things are better now than they were._)
* **[105: Why we can't have free online tax filing](/posts/fragments-105)**. Powerful corporations view politics as an arena in which to ensure their continued existence, at the expense of everybody else. _(On Intuit lobbying to prevent the US government from offering free tax filing. A few days after this fragment came out, ProPublica published an [article](https://www.propublica.org/article/turbotax-deliberately-hides-its-free-file-page-from-search-engines) about TurboTax deliberately hiding its free product from search engines, in order to steer customers towards paid products.)_
* **[106: Building a better billboard](/posts/fragments-106)**. Advertising technology solutions tend to optimise for the world as it is, not the world as it should be. _(We don't need more granularly-targeted billboards; we need fewer billboards.)_
* **[107: Finding the breadcrumbs](/posts/fragments-107)**. I found the left at a time of my life when I was forced to admit that I didn't actually know as much about the world as I thought I did.
* **[108: Locally optimal, globally absurd](/posts/fragments-108)**. Housing is an arena where the choices available to an individual are constrained within a narrow set of possibilities, each of which is globally suboptimal. _(On the renting vs dichotomy for individuals, and why those aren't the only options on a larger scale.)_
* **[109: When is a company a 'tech' company?](/posts/fragments-109)**. And why does it matter? _(Tech companies' high margins tend to come from 1) underpaying or simply misclassifying employees, and 2) hoarding intellectual property.)_
* **[110: Borrowing an ebook from the library](/posts/fragments-110)**. All copies of this ebook are currently checked out, so you'll have to wait until one becomes available. _(I strongly believe that digital content like ebooks should be available to everyone, at any time, for free, and I would like to transform the economy so that such a thing is feasible.)_
* **[111: Why do people work?](/posts/fragments-111)**. Under capitalism, the way to encourage someone to work is to offer them money. But the effects of offering more money are neither guaranteed nor uniform. _(Socially-important work is often underpaid, whereas some of the most pointless or even destructive work is overpaid. This is a highly inefficient way to run an economic system.)_
* **[112: On internal migration restrictions](/posts/fragments-112)**. When China restricts rural-urban migration, it's bad. When the same sort of restrictions are created by capitalism, that's totally fine. _(n.b. I do not actually think this is fine.)_
* **[113: What's wrong with inequality?](/posts/fragments-113)**. Surely inequality is just a natural consequence of innovation. And anyway, it's not that bad.
* **[114: We can have entrepreneurship without extreme wealth](/posts/fragments-114)**. (continued from day 113) Contesting the idea that you need the promise of massive financial reward to spur socially-useful entrepreneurship.
* **[115: Economic inequality is almost never harmless](/posts/fragments-115)**. (continued from day 113) The reason economic inequality is a problem is because it grants some undue power over others. 
* **[116: When the sorting function is broken](/posts/fragments-116)**. Our current 'meritocratic' sorting function is a terrible way to sort people into a system with highly variable economic rewards.
* **[117: 996.ICU and the rewards of hard work](/posts/fragments-117)**. Some Chinese tech workers are being asked to work 9am-9pm, 6 days a week. Will this serve as a wake-up call for Silicon Valley to start working harder? _(Some Silicon Valley investors would like that very much.)_
* **[118: Customer happiness isn't enough](/posts/fragments-118)**. The typical goal of antitrust enforcement is to ensure better outcomes for consumers. But customer happiness is not the most important factor when it comes to tech companies. _(The customer is not always right.)_
* **[119: You are not your code](/posts/fragments-119)**. Why software engineers need to worry about the social, economic, political implications of the products they build.

## Major themes

* Intellectual property is bad; same deal with inequality
* Criticising capitalism, on the other hand, is good
* No one should have to work at a company whose mission they don't believe in simply because they need money
* Be suspicious of those with power over you (what do they have to gain from making you believe something?)
* Me finishing these fragments later and later

## What’s coming

I always think my posts will get shorter. I don't think they've really gotten shorter yet. Next month, though, they will get shorter for real.

After writing these (nearly) every day for **four whole months**, I think I now have a pretty good sense of what I'm going to cover in my book, which I will be working on furiously for at least the next month. Please do not commission me for any writing or events until it's done, I beg you.
